This lecture gives an example of how
to think about formal modeling in
a prediction setting.
With associational analyses, the basic
goal is to determine whether a key
predictor and an outcome are associated
with each other in the presence of many
other potentially confounding factors.
But sometimes you wanna be able
to predict the outcome with
all of the available
information that you have.
So you don't necessarily have to
distinguish between, say, a key predictor
and a set of other predictors, okay,
you just want to use all the information.
So, and furthermore it doesn't matter
kind of if the variables are related to
the outcome in some sort of causal or
mechanistic way, but
if they carry any information
at all about the outcome,
they may be useful in a prediction
setting, and you might want to use them.
Because you're usually not
interested in developing a kind
of detailed understanding of how the
variables are related to each other, or
how about they're related to the outcome.
You just want to be able produce solid and
high quality predictions, and
so any variable that could play a role
in that might be useful to you.
So, what are the expectations that
we have about prediction problems?
So when we build a prediction model the
thing that we want is to be able to find
a feature or a set of features that can
produce good separation in the outcome.
Because typically the outcome is typically
going to be some binary outcome or
some multi-class outcome where
that can take either two values or
just a handful of values.
That is a typical setup
of a prediction problem.
And you want to be able to separate
the two classes using a set of
features that you collect, and
a model that you develop, okay?
So here's a very simple
example of a single predictor
on a binary outcome that produces
very good separation, okay?
This data is simulated, so
I just want to show you so
you can see what it looks like.
On the y-axis I have the values of
the outcome which are just 0 and 1, so
it's a binary outcome.
You can think of this as like not having
the disease and having the disease or
any sort of binary class
outcome like that.
On the x-axis here I've got a simulated
predictor that ranges between -2 and 2,
roughly.
And it's continuous, so it takes all
the different values in between there.
And you can see that there's a gray area
here that I've highlighted in the plot
that's kind of near the middle.
And you can see that in that grey area
that the outcome will take values 0 and
1 depending on the value predictor.
So the outcome can take either
value in that grey area.
To the right of the grey area you'll
notice that the outcome is always 1,
and to the left of the grey area you'll
see that the outcome's always 0.
So the goal of most prediction
algorithms is essentially
to minimize the size of that grey area.
Cuz that gray area is the area where
you have the most uncertainty.
It's because this is
the range of the predictor
where the outcome could
actually take both values.
So you have some uncertainty there.
Once you're outside that gray area,
you have almost absolute certainty,
because the outcome will either be 0 or 1.
So the goal is to minimize the size
of this gray area using some set
of features that you can collect.
So, for this example, I'm gonna use
a dataset on the creditworthiness
of a group of individuals.
And the dataset is taken from
the UCI Machine Learning Repository,
which is an excellent repository for
all kinds of machine learning and
prediction types of data sets.
So the data set classifies individuals
into good credit or bad creditworthiness.
And they include a variety
of variables to help you to
predict the creditworthiness
of these people.
So the basic process that we'll go
through here is we'll first split
the data set into a training and test set.
Then we'll fit the model
to the training data.
Then we'll make predictions based
on the model, but on the test data.
And then we'll compare the predictions
on the test data to the truth
that we know from the test
data to see how well we did.
So here are some of the results
from the model that we fit.
I won't get into the details of
the model cuz it doesn't
really matter at this point.
But here's a plot that you might make.
And the basic idea here is on the x-axis
we have our predicted probability of being
good, a good credit quality.
And on the y-axis we have the actual
truth of whether you're a good or
bad credit, you have the good or
bad credit.
Because this is the test data set,
we actually know the truth, and so
we can compare the truth with
what our prediction says.
And so a couple things you'll notice here,
first of all you'll notice it doesn't
quite look like that picture
where I simulated the data.
So, it doesn't quite match our
expectations of having this very good
separation, right?
All along the range of the x-axis you'll
see there are both values of bad and
good and so
the separation isn't necessarily so good.
Now you will notice there is a big clump
of points in the range of the x-axis.
But about point 6 they are mostly in
the good credit qualities category.
So as you can see as the predictor quality
goes up you'll see that the number
of actual good credit
quality people increases.
So there is at least an association there,
so that's good.
But one thing you'll notice is that
the prediction scores were all kind
of on the high end, they're all
basically greater than a half, and so
there isn't a lot of range there.
So ultimately, it's not clear that this
prediction algorithm is particularly good.
It seems like it's having some difficulty
finding out, finding a good combination
of features that can separate people
with good and kind of bad credit risk.
Something that can also be helpful is to
compute a set of summary statistics about
the prediction algorithm,
and you can see that here.
So here at the very top is what's
called a confusion matrix and
it shows the number of predictions
that are in the truth, bad or
good, that's called the reference, and
then what we predict to be bad or good.
And you'll notice immediately that most
of the predictions are just of good.
So the algorithm just basically classifies
everyone as good credit quality.
So I guess that makes sense because most
of the individuals in this data set have
good credit quality.
So if you were to make a prediction
it would be easiest just to say
you have good credit.
And then your prediction would
be right about 70% of the time.
You can see that the accuracy
of the algorithm is about 70%.
And so that's okay, but
the problem is that the algorithm's
specificity is very poor.
Which means that if you actually have bad
credit, the probability that the algorithm
will classify you as such is only
about 2.6%, so it's very low.
So if you truly have bad credit
the algorithm will have a difficult time
picking that up.
So there are a couple of
things to think about
when you see the results of
a prediction model like this one.
So, the first thing to think
about is prediction quality.
First, you have to ask yourself is
the model's accuracy good enough for
your purposes.
So you solve the summary statistics from
this particular model, which is okay.
It had a 70% accuracy,
it had 2.6% specificity.
Is that good enough for your purposes?
Well, it depends on
what your purposes are.
For example, in many medical applications
where the outcome is the presence of
a disease you may want that test or that
algorithm to have a very high sensitivity.
So if they truly have the disease,
you'll want the algorithm to pick it up.
Because then you can
send them into treatment,
and then kinda send them
down the road to recovery.
However, if the treatment for
that disease is very painful or
there are a lot of bad side effects
you may want to be careful about
exactly who you send out to treatment.
And particularly, you wouldn't want to
send someone who didn't have the disease
to a treatment that's going to be very
painful and have a lot of side effects.
So there, you would make sure that if
someone, you would want to make sure that
if someone does not have the disease, that
you pick that the algorithm picks that up.
And so there are different metrics that
you want to favor over each other,
depending on the kind of
decision that will be made and
the consequences of those decisions.
And so, for example, in a financial
application like the dataset we just
looked at with good and bad credit
quality, there may be asymmetric costs
associated with mistaking good credit for
bad versus bad credit for good.
So one scenario might
have very little cost or
another scenario might
have very high cost.
And so you wanna think about,
given the outcomes of your decision
what types of metrics you want,
whether sensitivity or specificity,
or all these other kinds of metrics,
which ones are going to be most
important to you in your setting.
Every setting is going to be
a little bit different, and so
you're not going to always focus on a
given metric for every single application.
So a hallmark of almost all prediction
algorithms is tuning parameters.
Most algorithms have lots and
lots of tuning parameters.
And even though they're called tuning
parameters, they can often have a very big
impact on the prediction quality of the
algorithm depending on how you set them.
And so you should be careful about how you
set them and how you change them around.
Now, there's no prediction
algorithm that I'm aware of
where a single set of tuning
parameters works fine for all problems.
So for any new data set that you
bring into a prediction algorithm,
you'll probably have to tune it
a little bit, and that's okay.
But the most important thing, excuse me,
is that you're gonna want to make sure you
keep track of all the tuning
parameters you set and
the process through which you
set these tuning parameters.
Because ultimately you're gonna
want this model to be reproducible.
And if you can't remember or
you can't reproduce the tuning parameters,
you'll never be able to
reproduce the algorithm itself.
So one last thing I want to mention is
about the availability of other data.
So many prediction algorithms
these days are very good at exploring
the structure of complex data and
making very good predictions, especially
once you get the tuning parameters right.
And so, but now it may be that if
your model is not working very well,
that you have to change to another
algorithm or another procedure because
different procedures can work
well in different settings and
different types of data structures and
different types of data set up.
And so it's not necessarily true that all,
the algorithms are exchangeable,
you may want to change the algorithm.
However, if you try a few algorithms and
they all seem to be producing kind of
a similar quality of prediction,
regardless of how well you tune them,
it may be time to get more data or other
data to help you predict the outcome.
It could just be that the dataset you have
only has an intrinsic amount of ability
to predict whatever outcome
you're interested in.
And you have to kind of get other data
that will have better predictive power.
And so think about that as you're
building prediction algorithms and
you're seeing the results.
That there always might be this
possibility that you have to bring in
additional data to
improve your predictions.